## Everything we need to know about HTTP

- HTTP is the protocol that every web developer should know, as it powers the entire web.
- Knowing HTTP can certainly help us develop better applications.
- In this article, We will discuss **what HTTP is**, **how it came to be**, **where it stands today**, and how we got here.

### What is HTTP?

- HTTP is a **TCP/IP-based application layer communication protocol that standardizes how clients and servers communicate with each other**. - It defines how content is requested and transmitted across the internet.
- By application layer protocol, I mean that it’s simply an abstraction layer that **standardizes how hosts (clients and servers) communicate**.
- HTTP itself depends on TCP/IP to get requests and responses between the client and server.
- By default, **TCP port 80** is used, but other ports can also be used.
- HTTPS, however, uses **port 443**.

### HTTP/0.9 - The One Liner (1991)

- The first documented version of HTTP was HTTP/0.9 which was put forward in 1991.
- It was the simplest protocol ever; **having a single method called GET**.
- If a client had to access some webpage on the server, it would have made the simple request like below:
  `GET /index.html`
  And the response from server would have looked as follows:

```
  (response body)
  (connection closed)
```

- That is, the server would get the request, reply with the HTML in response and as soon as the content has been transferred, the connection will be closed. There were:
  - No headers
  - `GET` was the only allowed method
  - Response had to be HTML
- As you can see, the protocol really had nothing more than being a stepping stone for what was to come.

### HTTP/1.0 - 1996

- In 1996, the next version of HTTP i.e. HTTP/1.0 evolved that vastly improved over the original version.
- Unlike HTTP/0.9 which was only designed for HTML response.
- HTTP/1.0 could now deal with other response formats i.e. images, video files, plain text or any other content type as well.
- It added more methods
  - (i.e. POST and HEAD),
  - request/response formats got changed,
  - HTTP headers got added to both the request and responses,
  - status codes were added to identify the response,
  - character set support was introduced,
  - multi-part types,
  - authorization,
  - caching,
  - content encoding and more was included.
- Here is how a sample HTTP/1.0 request and response might have looked like:

```
GET / HTTP/1.0
Host: cs.fyi
User-Agent: Mozilla/5.0 (Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 10_10_5)
Accept: */*
```

- As you can see, alongside the request, client has also sent it’s personal information, required response type etc.
- While in HTTP/0.9 client could never send such information because there were no headers.
- Example response to the request above may have looked like below:

```
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Content-Type: text/plain
Content-Length: 137582
Expires: Thu, 05 Dec 1997 16:00:00 GMT
Last-Modified: Wed, 5 August 1996 15:55:28 GMT
Server: Apache 0.84

(response body)
(connection closed)
```

- In the very beginning of the response there is HTTP/1.0 (HTTP followed by the version number).
- Then there is the status code 200 followed by the reason phrase (or description of the status code, if you will).
- In this newer version, request and response headers were still kept as ASCII encoded, but the response body could have been of any type i.e. image, video, HTML, plain text or any other content type.
- So, now that server could send any content type to the client; not so long after the introduction, the term “Hyper Text” in HTTP became misnomer.
- HMTP or Hypermedia transfer protocol might have made more sense but, I guess, we are stuck with the name for life.
- One of the major drawbacks of HTTP/1.0 were you couldn’t have multiple requests per connection.
- That is, whenever a client will need something from the server, it will have to open a new TCP connection and after that single request has been fulfilled, connection will be closed.
- And for any next requirement, it will have to be on a new connection.
- Why is it bad? Well, let’s assume that you visit a webpage having 10 images, 5 stylesheets and 5 javascript files, totalling to 20 items that needs to fetched when request to that webpage is made.
- Since the server closes the connection as soon as the request has been fulfilled, there will be a series of 20 separate connections where each of the items will be served one by one on their separate connections.
- This large number of connections results in a serious performance hit as requiring a new TCP connection imposes a significant performance penalty because of three-way handshake followed by slow-start.

### Three-Ways Handshake

- Three-way handshake in it’s simples form is that all the TCP connections begin with a three-way handshake in which the client and the server share a series of packets before starting to share the application data.

  - A. **SYN** - Client picks up a random number, let’s say x, and sends it to the server.
  - B. **SYN ACK** - Server acknowledges the request by sending an ACK packet back to the client which is made up of a random number, let’s say y picked up by server and the number x+1 where x is the number that was sent by the client
  - C. **ACK** - Client increments the number y received from the server and sends an ACK packet back with the number y+1

- Once the three-way handshake is completed, the data sharing between the client and server may begin.

- It should be noted that the client may start sending the application data as soon as it dispatches the last ACK packet but the server will still have to wait for the ACK packet to be recieved in order to fulfill the request.

- However, some implementations of HTTP/1.0 tried to overcome this issue by introducing a new header called Connection: keep-alive which was meant to tell the server “Hey server, do not close this connection, I need it again”. But still, it wasn’t that widely supported and the problem still persisted.

- Apart from being connectionless, HTTP also is a stateless protocol, in example, server doesn’t maintain the information about the client and so each of the requests has to have the information necessary for the server to fulfill the request on it’s own without any association with any old requests.

- And so this adds fuel to the fire i.e. apart from the large number of connections that the client has to open, it also has to send some redundant data on the wire causing increased bandwidth usage.
